---
title: Data Access
permalink: /data-access

section_id: data-access
layout: secondary
---

# Access to HTA Data
The HTA is committed to ensuring access to spatial profiling data according to emerging FAIR standards (for Findability, Access, Interoperability, and Reproducibility). However, few well-recognized public standards and repositories exist, and so access to different types of data remains a work in progress.

## HTA Data Types and Standards
HTA data currently comprises: (i) high-plex whole slide image data collected using [cyclic immunofluorescence (CyCIF)](https://elifesciences.org/articles/31657) and similar methods (ii) spatial feature tables computed from high-plex image data describing marker intensity and morphological features at a single cell level (iii) dissociative mRNA-Seq data (iv) transcriptional profiles obtained using micro-region transcript profiling methods such as [GeoMX](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32394392/) and [Pick-Seq](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.03.18.431004v1). We will add additional data types in the future.

### Data Standards
We use existing data standards whenever possible (e.g. [BioFormats](https://www.openmicroscopy.org/bio-formats/) and OME-TIFF or its next generation [NGFF](https://pubmed-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/34845388/) replacements). Transcriptional data is distributed via [GEO](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) using well-established approaches. We have also developed a [Minimum Information about highly multiplexed Tissue Imaging (MITI)](miti-consortium.org) standard that applies best practices developed for genomics and other microscopy data to highly multiplexed tissue images and traditional histology. As of Spring 2022, these standards have not yet been fully applied to any released dataset but compliance is expected later this year. Individuals and organizations interest in MITI are directed to the image.sc forum and may submit pull requests (i.e. requests for inclusion in the MITI “code base” at https://github.com/miti-consortium/MITI). Specifying a metadata standard is separate from developing a practical and reliable means for capturing the information needed to ensure adherence to the standard. In the case of MITI, such tools are currently in development.

### Data Levels
To manage spatial profiles we have adopted the concept Data Levels from dbGAP. The greater the data level, the more processed the data (see [MITI publication](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35277708/) for additional details and background information). Software for generating different types of data can be found at the [MCMICRO](https://mcmicro.org/) web site. In the case of genomic data, de-identification risk restricts the distribution of Level 1 and 2 data; in the case of high-plex tissue images no such restriction exists but data levels have been harmonized with dbGAP so that Level 3 data is the primary type of data for public distribution. Date information has been removed from all image files in compliance with best practices for distribution of patient-derived data.

**Level 1 Data**: Whole slide imaging usually involves acquisition of ~100 to 1,000 individual image tiles, each collected from a different X and Y location. These individual multi-dimensional, subcellular resolution image tiles comprise Level 1 data.

**Level 2 Data**: Level 2 MITI data correspond to full-resolution images that have undergone automated stitching, registration, illumination correction, background subtraction, intensity normalization and have been stored in a standardized OME format. Level 1 image tiles are combined at sub-pixel accuracy into a mosaic image in a process known as [stitching](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.04.20.440625v1). When high-plex images are assembled from multiple rounds of lower-plex imaging, it is also necessary to register channels to each other across imaging cycles and to correct for any unevenness in illumination (so-called flat fielding). Stitched and registered mosaics can be as large as 50,000 x 50,000 pixels x 100 channels, requiring ~500 GB of disk space. This level of processing is analogous to BAM files in genomics.

**Level 3 Data**: Level 3 data represent images that have been processed with some interpretive intent and are intended to be the primary type of image data distributed by tissue atlases and similar projects. Interpretive intent may include (i) full-resolution images following quality control or artifact removal, (ii) segmentation masks computed from such images, (iii) machine-generated spatial models, and (iv) images with human or machine-generated annotations. Level 3 MITI data is roughly analogous to Level 3 mRNA expression data in genomics. However, whereas many users of genomic data only require access to processed level 3 and 4 data, which are usually quite compact, quantitative analysis of tissue images adds a requirement for full-resolution primary images so that images and computed features can be examined in parallel.

**Level 4 Data**: Level 4 data comprise features derived from level 3 images, most commonly single-cell features in “spatial feature tables” that describes marker intensities, cell coordinates and other single-cell features. Level 4 data in spatial feature tables are a natural complement to Level 4 count tables in single cell sequencing data (e.g. scRNA-seq, scATAC-seq, scDNA-seq) and can be analyzed using many of the same dimensionality reduction methods (e.g. PCA, t-SNE and U-MAP) and on-line browsers such as cellxgene.

**Level 5 Data**: Level 5 data comprise results computed from spatial feature tables or primary images. Because access to TB-size full-resolution image data is impractically burdensome when reading a manuscript or browsing a large dataset, a specialized type of Level 5 image data has been developed to enable panning and zooming across images using a standard web browser. [MINERVA](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34750536/) is an example of such a browsing tools that also features digital docents.

## Requester Pays Access
In the absence of a major public resource for storage for image data (as compared to genomic data) we are using a “requester pays” model for access to very large image datasets. The primary cost associated with creation and maintenance of a dataset on a commercial cloud service involves data download, not data ingress and storage. In a requester pays model, a user seeking access to a dataset pays the cost of data egress directly to the cloud provider making access both secure and anonymous (moreover, the cost of egress into another account on the same commercial cloud is typically very low).
