---
title: Harvard Tissue Atlas
permalink: /

hero text: |
  Tissue and tumor atlases provide precise molecular data on cell types, states, and interactions in a preserved 3D environment to revolutionize our understanding of disease progression and therapeutic response. This will improve diagnosis and disease management.


wide_container: true
section_id: home
layout: home
---

# Navigating Spatial Biology

The Harvard Tissue Atlas (HTA) is a collection of research projects focused on different diseases and tissues, primarily in humans but also in animal models. Each Atlas comprises molecular and physical maps of tissues and tumors generated using highly multiplexed tissue imaging, spatial transcriptomics, imaging mass spectrometry and other methods that provide detailed information on the spatial distributions of cell types and states. The aim is to fundamentally advance biomedical research, assessment of clinical trials, and develop a new generation of diagnostics for disease stratification and precision medicine.  

Conventional tissue microscopy (histology) is widely used in both research and diagnostic settings. The development of the HTA is strongly influenced by the experience and expertise of practicing pathologists who use histology on a daily basis. The HTA team is committed to applying advances in high-plex tissue profiling developed for research settings to improve diagnosis and disease management for individual patients; this is facilitated by an ongoing transition from conventional to digital pathology in the clinic. Ultimately, we aim to detect diseases, such as cancer, much earlier and enable its eradication; when disease is more advanced, we aim to develop new ways of matching individual patients to the therapies most likely to benefit them.

The HTA is based on research performed in the Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology (LSP) at Harvard Medical School and the laboratories of its international collaborators.  HTA Atlases address different biological problems and types of disease, from tuberculosis to cancer, but they share common technical, software, and educational resources. These resources are the work of molecular and systems biologists, clinicians, computer scientists, and software engineers, including graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.  With very rare exceptions, the data and software-generated by HTA projects are freely available under permissive Creative Commons or open source software licenses.

The HTA is supported primarily by federal and foundation grants but welcomes participation by commercial instrument and reagent companies and by biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies interested in applying spatial profiling to IND-enabling studies and clinical trials. Positions are available for students, postdocs and research staff under the supervision of faculty with diverse skills and interests.
